this thing here I mean it looks like a
galaxy right it's like this weird
ghostly dusty galaxy but it's not a
galaxy it's a star in our own Milky Way
there's about 1000 light years away and
look lit right that's not a star like
what on earth is going on here
so if something called ll pegasi or a
FGL 3:06 ate any member and it looks
like this and i remember the first time
that someone showed me this picture and
I was like no way that's fake that's not
real that's like photoshopped right
they're like no no NASA press release
this is a real thing that it observed
but the Hubble Space Telescope I was
gobsmacked like it's really strange so
ignore like the bright star in the bull
ground because that's just the right
star so that's about sort of a couple
hundred light years closer to it so this
thing is really weird like no question
about that
against the weirdest thing I've ever
seen so what it is is what's called a
carbon star so if you take a spectra of
the light from that area of the sky you
will see there's a lot of absorption
from carbon in fact is absorbing all of
the light from the star that's in the
very center of that spirals but we can't
actually see it invisible and so we've
seen a lot of these things before across
the Milky Way basically they're kind of
like the last gasp at the end of a
star's life so we're talking about stars
that are about the same size of mass is
the Sun so huge massive stars that are
like 50 to 100 times the mass of the Sun
when they get standard of life they have
this dramatic explosion that we call a
supernova but something like the Sun it
kind of goes through this weird period
where it sort of tries really hard not
to just collapse and die so the way that
stars power themselves is through
nuclear fusion okay so they take a
hydrogen atom it's single acts from
hydrogen fuse it together with another
atom of hydrogen and you make helium and
you need really intense temperatures and
pressures to be able to do that so in a
scar itself you've got gravity
constantly pulling it in and trying to
collapse it and then you've got the
energy being released from that fusion
pushing it outwards all the time but the
only place that's actually dense enough
or hot enough to be able to get those
hydrogen atoms to come together and fuse
together is in the very very core of the
star so over the millions and billions
of years that it lives for you're
constantly turning hydrogen into helium
but that helium is building up like a
waste product and eventually you know
you get to the point where in the core
you've got no hydrogen left in that area
where it's hot enough for dense enough
to fuse it together you've actually got
no hydrogen left all together then it's
not producing any
it's not producing energy to stop
gravity from collapsing it inwards
anymore and so it has this sort of like
moment where gravity starts to collapse
it but then all of a sudden it's hot
enough in a very tight shell around that
core to start burning hydrogen into
helium again and so what you end up with
is this sort of like pulsation where it
sort of collapses in and all it's hot
enough again for a while until expanding
in and then it will collapse inwards
again and so you end up would be sort of
slowly these building up these shelves
of helium further and further out into
the star until the point where you then
have to start burning helium into the
heavier elements like it gets hot enough
to do that in those regions and you end
up with this sort of onion like
structure of more and more elements
being made around the core by that way
that you're producing so much energy
that actually the star swells up to a
huge size so this is gonna happen to the
Sun and when it swells it's actually
gonna go beyond like the orbit and earth
you end up with this huge huge star that
at the edge it's not really holding on
to its gases very well anymore it can
start to shed a lot of material as it
sort of does this weird pulsing as its
producing these shells of material but
carbon stars we've seen a lot of them
across the Milky Way all the things that
are about the times the mass of the Sun
which there are a lot of 10/10 their
life is carbon stars throwing off
material and may sort of shells though
so when he's throwing off all this
carbon from the star unit blocking the
light from the star that you can still
reflect other star light off all that
gas and dust that the star is thrown off
and you end up with what's called like a
reflection nebula so we know a lot of
different reflection nebulae in our own
sky so what we kind of have here with ll
pegasi is like a reflection nebula
except it's not shells of material like
we used to it's this weird spiral so
what is going on so actually this spiral
structure is actually what's called a
perfect
Archimedes spiral like literally if you
overlay a perfect Archimedes spiral on
this thing you'll see that it fits
show so well and I said at the beginning
you know this thing could kind of look
like a galaxy right like a spiral galaxy
except your spiral galaxy has what's
called a logarithmic spiral so a
logarithmic spiral that people will be
most familiar
you know in nature we see all the times
I like shells like hurricanes and
cyclones galaxies all logarithmic
spirals what happens that if you're
gonna draw it the distance between the
sort of ever-widening spirals is getting
bigger and bigger every time so you're
moving around at the same angle but
you're actually getting further and
further away from every single spiral
that you do that's very different to an
Archimedes spiral where you're tiling
around the same angle all the time but
actually what you're doing is you're
keeping the exact same separation you're
moving away from the center and a
constant speed basically and so what
you've got here in ll pegasi is clear
this case where you've got this material
being shared off the central star
instead of getting it in shells you're
getting it in this sort of constant rate
of outflow from the star but like in a
spiral shape now back in 99 master Dobis
and Morris actually predicted that you
would get that pass in if the star
that's throwing off all that material
wasn't just a single stationary star it
was actually in a binary system of star
so those two stars and they're going
round this sort of center of mass
between them you don't have one thing
that's going around one star like in a
planetary system you know with earth
around the Sun you have two stars and
they're both orbiting around each other
so the star that's giving off all of
that carbon material is no longer
stationary it's moving kind of like a
like a garden a sprinkler system or
something right it's like constantly
firing it off around the star and then
also this one is sort of gravitationally
shepherding that material as well into
this perfect spiral so that's the
hypothesis proving that that is true and
it becoming accepted theory is the
difficult part so first of all you have
got to prove that this thing is a binary
star system right and we've already said
that we can't see it because all this
carbon material is blocking the visible
light from the stars but the way that we
see through all this dust in the rest of
the universe is through infrared light
and so back in 2006 when this image was
first taken they made sure to check with
an infrared telescope this was kept in
Hawaii on Mauna Kea and they looked at
this star with infrared light and
actually found yeah there are two stars
there and actually in different infrared
photos you see different
different stars and so in a red or
infrared voting you see like just the
one carbon solid it's very red in a
middling one you see both of the stars
in a very bluish sort of shorter
wavelength infrared light you see just
the one star that's sort of its
companion star okay so that's first drop
down proving that it's a binary star
okay yes there are two stars that we can
see in the center of that spiral so we
reckon that around about 40 to 50
percent of stars are actually binary
stars like so that means when you look
up in the night sky and you can see a
single star like and you think that's
one strong it's more likely that it's
gonna be a binary star because we run
about 50 percent in fact one of the
stars in the plow or the Big Dipper is
actually a binary sorry if you get
bananas on it you will be able to see
that as well so they're not uncommon
things the binary stars so we printed as
a binary star there but how do we
actually test this hypothesis well under
the hypothesis right if you've got these
two stars going around each other then
the time it takes for them to go around
each other should be proportional to
time it takes for the spiral pattern to
move away so imagine if you're stood in
a single place watching these stars go
around each other if it takes say 10
minutes them to go around it so it won't
but say let's say it does like every 10
minutes you will sort of be hit by a
fresh wave of carbon coming off one of
the stars right and so that will be the
spacing of the spirals so if the spacing
of those spirals is proportional to the
period of those stars going around each
other then we can kind of be sure that
it's because of the binary star system
that this spiral has been created so
you've got to measure both of those
things right so this is what the paper
in 2006 that first sort of presented
this image that have been taken and was
like hey look at this little cool weird
thing and this is what they tried to do
so the easy one there is to measure like
the time between those successive spiral
turns so because we know how big the
whole thing is you can then get an
estimate of the distance between each
successive spiral turn and then because
we know how fast the material is out
flowing in the spiral just through you
know a taking spectra and getting a
redshift
we can then work out just from you know
time equals distance over speed what is
the time do
prints between each successive spiral
term so this publication from 2006 and
they first published this pictures that
it was around about 710 years pretty
short live national local time skills
writers especially when this phase of
carbon stars thought to be around about
like a hundred thousand years like a
million years
she's pretty shot so then the next thing
you have to do is then figure out if
that 710 years coincides with how long
it takes for each of those two stars to
go around each other what is the orbital
period of that binary star system so
that's a little bit harder you can get
it from sort of the distance they're
separated so that image that they took
an infrared they can estimate a
separation again from knowing how big
that appears in the sky
knowing how distant they are you can
then estimate the actual distance
separation of the stars then once you've
got that if you make the assumption that
both of the stars are the same mass
which is quite a generalizing assumption
but if you do that you can use Kepler
orbital dynamics to be able to get an
estimate for the period and so the
authors of the study that produced this
picture found that that period was
around about 810 years divided by the
square root of the mass of the star so
if each star has mass M it's 800 10 over
square root M yes and so if you want to
get 710 years which is the spacing
between the spiral turns you need a mass
of about 1.3 times the mass of the Sun
which is kind of the mass you would
expect for a common star like it falls
in that range so from that result it's
becoming quite likely this this
hypothesis is true it's not quite
accepted there yet because there's still
two weird things here about this the
first one is why haven't we seen more of
these things if 50 percent of stars are
in binary systems and you know around
about the mass of the Sun stars are
pretty common like we should see quite a
lot of these things I mean it could just
be to do with the fact that the lifetime
of a common star is pretty sure in
comparison to the lifetime of the main
star so when it's happily burning fusion
you know the star could live like eight
to ten billion years but the carbon
staff baby is more of a hundred thousand
to a million years so it's not a very
large percentage of its lifetime the
other thing could also be to do with the
fact that
you have to see these things like purely
face on like with the two stars going
around each other like this to get that
spiral structure that's kind of all to
do with orientation you're not going to
see all binary stars perfectly face
aren't some of them are going to be
moving around this way you know slightly
inclined it's all to do with your
viewing angle from Earth so combined
with the fact that the life time is
short and that you have to be at the
perfect viewing angle maybe that's why
we don't see many of these things the
second thing though is that we can even
see it it's all like the light from
those two stars in the center is
completely blocked by all the carbon
dust that it's giving off so it looks
like that really bright star in the
image is what's allowing us to see this
thing but actually that star is in the
foreground like it's a lot closer to us
and a thousand light years away that the
spiral is so what light source is
actually producing the light so that
it's reflected back at us so that we can
see this carbon ducts and the authors of
the paper that published this image
actually suggested that if you look at
the direction the light is coming from
it turns out that that's where the sort
of Galactic plane of the Milky Way is so
this thing is actually sort of raised
above the main sort of spiral disk of
the Milky Way and if you look at the
direction of light coming from that disc
is in that direction and so what they
think it is and the reason that it is so
faint is because there's no main star
nearby it can light up actually it's
being lit up by the entire sort of
cumulative star light of the Milky Way
it's sort of lit by this sort of
galactic glow so it's a privilege we can
even see this thing combine the fact
that carbon stars have short life times
that it's at just the right orientation
for us to see this thing and the fact
that Hubble can just see it because it's
so faint because all it's reflecting is
like galactic star light it's incredible
it really makes me wonder like what
weird wonderful objects do we not know
about because we're not in the right
place in the universe like to even be
able to see them
hey curious minds hit my microphone
great start X being equal distantly the
times the time inconsistent always being
okay what is the difference in time
between each successive spiral turn turn
turn
you